# Multiplayer Command

## SGB Command 11h - MLT_REQ

Used to request multiplayer mode (that is, input from more than one joypad).
Because this function provides feedback from the SGB/SNES to the Game
Boy program, it can also be used to detect SGB hardware.

```
 Byte  Content
 0     Command*8+Length    (fixed length=1)
 1     Multiplayer Control (0-3) (Bit0=Enable, Bit1=Two/Four Players)
         0 = One player
         1 = Two players
         3 = Four players
 2-F   Not used (zero)
```

In one player mode, the second joypad (if any) is used for the SGB
system program. In two player mode, both joypads are used for the game.
Because SNES have only two joypad sockets, four player mode requires an
external "Multiplayer 5" adapter.

Changing the number of active players ANDs the currently selected player
minus one with the number of players in that mode minus one. For example
if you go from four players to two players and player 4 was active
player 2 will then be active because 3 AND 1 is 1. However, sending the
MLT_REQ command will increment the counter several times so results may
not be exactly as expected. The most frequent case is going from one
player to two-or-four player which will always start with player 1
active.

## Reading Multiple Controllers (Joypads)

When having enabled multiple controllers by MLT_REQ, data for each
joypad can be read out through JOYPAD register (FF00) as follows: First
set P14 and P15 both HIGH (deselect both Buttons and Cursor keys), you
can now read the lower 4 bits of $FF00 which indicate the joypad ID for
the following joypad input:

Byte | Player \#
-----|-----------
 $0F | 1
 $0E | 2
 $0D | 3
 $0C | 4

Next, read joypad state as normally. When completed, set P14 and P15
back HIGH, this automatically increments the joypad number (or restarts
counting once reached the lastmost joypad). Repeat the procedure until
you have read-out states for all two (or four) joypads.

If for whatever reason you want to increment the joypad number without
reading the joypad state you only need to set P15 to LOW before setting
it back to HIGH. Adjusting P14 does not affect whether or not the joypad
number will advance, However, if you set P15 to LOW then HIGH then LOW
again without bringing both P14 and P15 HIGH at any point, it cancels
the increment until P15 is lowered again. There are games, such as
Pokémon Yellow, which rely on this cancelling when detecting the SGB.
